Installation

The first step is to install Rust. We'll download Rust through rustup, a command line tool for
managing Rust versions and associated tools. You'll need an internet connection for the download.


  Command Line Notation
  
  In this chapter and throughout the book, we'll show some commands used in the terminal.
  Lines that you should enter in a terminal all start with $. You don't need to type in the $
  character; it indicates the start of each command. Lines that don't start with $ typically show
  the output of the previous commands. Additionally, PowerShell-specific examples will use >
  rather than $.


Installing rustup on Linux or macOS

If you're using Linux or macOS, open a terminal and enter the following command:

$ curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh

The command downloads a script and starts the installation of the rustup tool, which installs the 
latest stable version of Rust.


Installing rustup on Windows

The rest of this book uses commands that work in both cmd.exe and PowerShell. If there are specific
differences, we'll explain which to use.


Updating and Unistalling

After you've installed Rust via rustup, updating to the latest version is easy. From your shell, run the
following update script:

$ rustup update

To uninstall Rust and rustup, run the following unistall script from your shell:

$ rustup self uninstall


Trobleshooting

To check whether you have Rust installed correctly, open a shell and enter this line:

$ rustc --version

You should see the version number, commit hash, and commit data for the latest stable version that 
has been released in the following format:

rustc x.y.z (abcabcabc yyy-mm-dd)

If you see this information, you have installed Rut successfully! If you don't see this information and
you're on Windows, check that Rust is in your %PATH% system variable. If that's all correct and Rust 
still isn't working, there are a number of places you can get help.


Local Documentation

The installer also includes a copy of the documentation locally, so you can read it offline. Run 
rustup doc to open the local documentation in your browser.

Any time a type or function is provided by the standard library and you're not sure what it does or
how to use it, use the application programming interface(API) documentation to find out!

