Chapter 1: Introduction

The goal of having computers automatically solve problems is central to 
artificial intelligence, machine learning, and the broad area encompassed by 
what Turing called "machine intelligence" (?). Machine learning 
pioneer Arthur Samuel, in his 1983 talk entitled "AI: Where It Has Been 
and Where It Is Going"(Samuel, 1983), started that the main goal of the 
fields of machine learning and artificial intelligence is:

"To get machine to exhibit behaviour, which if done by humans, 
would be assumed to involve the use of intelligence."

Genetic programming (GP) is an evolutionary computation (EC) technique
that automatically solves problems without requiring the user to know
or specify the form or structure of the solution in advance. At the most
abstract level GP is a systematic, domain-independent method for getting
computers to solve problems automatically starting from a high-level statment
of what needs to be done.

Since its inception, GP has attracted the interest of myriads of people 
around the globe. This book gives an overview of the basics of GP, 
summarised important work that gave direction and impetus to the field and
discusses some interesting new directions and applications. Things continue
to change repidly in genetic programming as investigators and practitioners
discover new methods and applications. This makes it impossible to cover
all aspects of GP, and this book should be seen as a snapshot of a particular
moment in the history of field.


1.1 Genetic Programming in a Nutshell

In genetic programming we evolve a population of computer programs. That
is, generation by generation, GP stochastically transforms populations of 
programs into new, hopefully better, populations of programs, cf.
GP's essential reandomness, however, can lead it to escape traps which 
deterministic methods may be captured by. Like nature, GP has been very
successful at evolving novel and unexpected ways of solving problems.


1.2 Getting Started


1.3 Prerequisites


1.4 Overview of this Field Guide



