1.7 Putting it together with a practical example

As already mentioned a few times, throughout the course of this book we’ll build a
working application on the MEAN stack. This will give you a good grounding in each
of the technologies, as well as showing how they all fit together. 


1.7.1 Introducing the example application

So what are we actually going to be building as we go through the book? We’ll be
building an application called Loc8r. Loc8r will list nearby places with WiFi where
people can go and get some work done. It will also display facilities, opening times, a
rating, and a location map for each place. Users will be able to log in and submit 
ratings and reviews.

This application has some grounding in the real world. Location-based applications 
themselves are nothing particularly new and come in a few different guises.
Foursquare and Facebook Check In list everything nearby that they can, and crowdsource 
data for new places and information updates. UrbanSpoon helps people find
nearby places to eat, allowing a user to search on price bracket and type of cuisine.
Even companies like Starbucks and McDonald’s have sections of their applications to
help users find the nearest one.

REAL OR FAKE DATA?
Okay, so we’re going to fake the data for Loc8r in this book, but you could collate the
data, crowd-source it, or use an external source if you wanted. For a rapid prototype
approach you’ll often find that faking data for the first private version of your 
application speeds up the process.

END PRODUCT
We’ll use all layers of the MEAN stack to create Loc8r, including Twitter Bootstrap to
help us create a responsive layout. Figure 1.7 shows some screenshots of what we’re
going to be building throughout the book.


1.7.2 How the MEAN stack components work together

By the time you’ve been through this book you’ll have an application running on the
MEAN stack, using JavaScript all of the way through. MongoDB stores data in binary
JSON, which through Mongoose is exposed as JSON. The Express framework sits on
top of Node.js, where the code is all written in JavaScript. In the front end is 
AngularJS, which again is JavaScript. Figure 1.8 illustrates this flow and connection.

We’re going to explore various ways you can architect the MEAN stack and how we’re
going to build Loc8r in chapter 2.