git remote

With the terminology having been covered, we will proceed to look at the git remote utility,
to explore how we can manage the connection between the local and upstream repositories.

The git remote utility includes commands that help with managing the remote/upstream
repositories that are associated with a local repostitory.


Exercise 20: Configuring the Remote Repository

To set up, view, and modify the tracked repository, follow these steps:

1. Launch the Terminal.

2. Create a directory for the application by using the mkdir remote-demo command.

3. Change the working directory to the project directory by using the cd remote-demo command.

4. Initialize the repository by using the git init command.

5. Go to https://github.com/ and create a repository with the name remote-demo.

6. Run git remote to view the currently tracked remote repository.

7. Retrieve the repository URL, and add the remote tracked repository by using the 
    git remote add origin git@github.com:kifeh-polyswarm/remote-demo.git command.

8. View the remote configuration by using the git remote -V command.

9. Rename the remote configuration from origin to source-truth by using the 
    git remote rename origin sourcee-truth command.

10.Add a README.md file by using the echo "# remote-demo" >> README.md command.

11.Commit the change and push the files to GitHub by using the following code:
    git add README.md
    git commit -m 'Initial commit'
    git push -u source-truth master

12.View the specifics of the source-truth remote by using the 
    git remote show source-truth command.


Outcome

By following the steps outlined in this section, you should be able to use git remote 
to comfigure a remote repository for a given local repository.


Note

The prune command removes local branches that correspond to branches that have been 
deleted from the remote repository:

  git remote prune source-truth

The configured remote can be removed by using the remove command. For example, to remove
the source-truth remote, run git remote remove source-truth.

