Runtime Config

Git supports the configuration of runtime options.
These options and/or values are used by other Git commands
to dictate behavior. Runtime configuration are set 
using the git config command.

The git config command allows for the setting, retrieving,
removal, and replacement of configurations. Git configurations 
are set in three levels, namely:

System wide configuration

These options are set in the /etc/gitconfig file. The presets 
specified in this category are used for all of the users on a computer.

To access these settings, you use the git config -- system flag 
specifies that system wide configuration should be used.

User-specific configuration

These options are set in the ~/.gitconfig file. The presets provided
here are used for the user account that is in use on a computer.

The user-specific settings are accessed via the git config --global
flag specific that user specific configuration should be used.

Repository-specific configuration

Repository-specific settings are set in the path_to_repository/.git/config
file. The options set here are used at the repository level. An example
of configuration here is the GitHub URL of a repository, which is set
at this level.

These settings are accessed via the git config --local flag specifies that 
repository specific configuration should be used.

You may specify a specific config file using the -f or --file option.


Exercise 6: Setting User Credentials

To set up the user credentials for an account, follow these setps:

1. Launch the Terminal or command prompt.

2. Set the unsername by using the following command:
   git config --global user.name 

3. Set up the email by using the following command:
   git config --global user.email

4. List the configuration using one of the following command:
   git config --global --list    or, 
   git config --list  
   to fetch all the available presets.


Outcome

You have successfully set up the user credentials for an account.


Removing Configuration

Using git config, we can remove configuration in the event that a change
is reuired. The git config utility supports this by using the --unset option.

The syntax of the command is indicated as follows:

git config --global --unset [section_name].[section_variable]


Example 

git config --global --unset user.name

The preceding command will remove the value set for the user's username.

