Preface

It has been more than 3 years since Python Network Programming
Cookbook was first published. In this second edition, we extend
our book to discuss the recent advancedments in the networking
industry and network softwarization. The widespread use of 
Software-Defined Networking (SDN), Network Functions
Virtualization (NFV), and orchestration have been addressed in 
detail in the latter chapters while the first eight chapters were
taken from the first edition, improved with a few recipes
based on the feedback from the readers.

This book is an exploratory guide to network programming in
Python. It has touched a wide range of networking protocols
such as TCP/UDP, HTTP/HTTPS, FTP, SMTP, POP3, IMAP, and 
CGI. With the power and interactivity of Python, it brings joy
and fun to develop various scripts for performing real-word
tasks on network and system administration, web application
development, interacting with your local and remote network,
low-level network packet capture and analysis, and so on. The
primary focus of this book is to give you a hands-on experience
on the topics covered. So, this book covers less theory, but it is
packed with practical materials.

This book is written with a DevOps mindset, where a developer
is also more or less in charge of operation, that is, deploying the
application and managing various aspects of it, such as remote 
server administration, monitoring, scaling-up, and optimizing
for better perofrmance. This book introduces you a bunch of 
open-source, third-party Python libraries, which are ideal to be
used in various use cases. We elaborate in detail the 
configurations of complex networking systems with helpful
hints to ensure that the reader can follow them without getting
stuck.

We hope you will enjoy hte recipes presented in this book and 
extend them to make them even more powerful and enjoyable.


What this book covers

Chapter 1, Sockets, IPv4, and Simple Client/Server Programming,
introduces you to Python's core networking library with various
small tasks and enables you to create your first client-server 
application.

Chapter 2, Multiplexing Socket I/O for Better Performance, discusses
various useful techniques for scaling your client/server
applications with default and third-party libraries.

Chapter 3, IPv6, Unix Domain Sockets, and Network Interfaces,
focuses more on administrering your local machine and looking 
after your local area network.

Chapter 4, Programming with HTTP for the Internet, enables you to
create a mini command-line browser with various featuers such
as submitting web forms, handling cookies, managing partial
downloads, compressing data, and serving secure content over
HTTPS.

Chapter 5, Email Protocols, FTP, and CGI Programming, brings you
the joy of automating your FTP and e-mail tasks such as
manipulating your Gmail account, and reading or sending
emails from a script or creating a guest book for your web
application. We learn to write email clients with SMTP and
POP3.

Chapter 6, Programming Across Machine Boundaries, gives you a 
taste of automating your system administration and
deployment tasks over SSH. You can run commands, install
packages, or set up new websites remotely from your laptop.

Chapter 7, Working with Web Services-XML-RPC, SOAP, and REST,
introduces you to various API protocol such as XML-RPC, SOAP,
and REST. You can programmatically ask any website or web
service for information and interact with them. For example,
you can search for products on Amazon or Google.

Chapter 8, Network Monitoring and Security, introduces you to
various techniques for capturing, storing, analyzing, and
manipulating network packets. This encourages you to go
further to investigate your network security issues using
concise Python scripts.

Chapter 9, Network Modeling, introduces you to the world of 
network simulations and emulations. You learn to simulate
networks with NS-3, and emulate networking systems with
Mininet and its extensions.

Chapter 10, Getting Started with SDN, discusses the enterprise SDN
controllers, configuring them to use in Software-Defined
Networks. We learn to develop SDN visually with MiniEdit, and
configure the networks with OpenDaylight, ONOS, Floodlight,
Ryu, and POX controllers.

Chapter 11, Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA),
introduces how the networks are secured, and discusses
configuring LDAP clients with Python, accounting aspects of the
network, and authentication and access of network services.

Chapter 12, Open and Proprietary Networking Solution, discusses in
detail, configuring large-scale enterprise networking projects,
including a few porjects from Cisco, Juniper, VMware, and the
Linux Foundation.

Chapter 13, NFV and Orchestration - A Larger Ecosystem, discusses
configuring complex NFV and orchestration systems of the
Linux Foundation, such as OPNFV, DPD, SNAS.io, Dronekit, and
PNDA. We elaborte the use of Python in these complex systems.

Chapter 14, Programming the Internet, presents you various
Python libraries for BGP protocol and implementations
developed for the internet scale. We learn to use and benchmark
libraries such as exabgp and yabgp, and also discuss the looking
glass implementations with Python.


Who this book is for

If you are a network programmer, system/network
administrator, or a web application developer, this book is ideal
for you. You should have a basic familiarity with the Python
programming language and TCP/IP networking concepts
However, if you are a novice, you will develop an understanding
of the concepts as you progress with this book. This book will
serve as suppliementary material for developing hands-on skills
in any academic course on network programming.

